Certain family court hearings to take place in public in radical trial
Family court hearings are to be held in public for the first time, in a radical trial being pursued by the leading family judge for England and Wales, the Guardian understands.
Sir James Munby, the president of the family division of the high court, is to continue far-reaching reforms to bring more transparency to the system in 2017 by launching a trial in which some types of hearings would be held in public.
It is expected appropriate orders will remain in place to protect the identities of the participants. A separate plan is being considered to allow the media access to documents from hearings that have previously been kept secret.
Women who have suffered domestic violence and experienced the family courts broke the ban on discussing their cases to reveal to the Guardian how they believe the secrecy of the system allows them to be further abused by ex-partners.
Claire Waxman, of Voice4Victims, who campaigns to highlight abuse of process within the family and civil courts, welcomed moves to increase the openness of the court system. “We would support the increase of transparency in the family courts,” she said. “We are seeing far too many victims of stalking and domestic violence being exposed to unnecessary risk and harm in these court proceedings.”
But Munby’s changes are likely to be opposed by much of the legal profession working within the family division.
Joanne Edwards, former chair of Resolution, the national family law association, and head of family law at Forsters, said: “There is pretty widespread, if not universal, opposition to the public hearing pilot which is being suggested and to the release of court documents to members of the press.
“There is strong opposition to any further opening up of the court amongst the professions. For us it is about safeguarding the interests of children who, unlike in criminal proceedings, invariably become embroiled in family proceedings through no fault of their own. There is a real risk of jigsaw identification and once details of their private family life are out there, they can never be retrieved. The resulting harm to children can be profound.”
Family courts, which deal with issues such as divorce, financial provision for children, contact with children, adoption and local authority intervention to protect children, were opened to the media in 2009, but hearings largely remain secret. Judges can limit media attendance, there are tight restrictions on what – if anything – can be reported, the media have no access to documents and can be ordered to leave the court on the decision of the judge or magistrate.
Munby consulted closely with senior lawyers in Australia, where family courts have been held in open hearings for the last 30 years, before launching the reforms. He has said pursuing further transparency in family courts is a subject close to his heart.
He issued guidance in January 2014 aimed at encouraging judges to publish their judgments on the judicial website Bailii in redacted and anonymised forms to protect the identities of children. But the guidance only applied to the top level of judges and in the vast majority of family cases heard by district judges and magistrates, judgments are not published.
According to Ministry of Justice figures, 225,590 cases were completed in the family court in 2015, almost half of which were divorce cases. In the same year, judges published 469 judgments on Bailii.
Prof Julie Doughty, lecturer in law at Cardiff University, who is being funded by Nuffield to research transparency in the family courts, said current measures did not go far enough. “The judicial guidance of 2014 hasn’t ended the perception and allegations of secrecy in the family courts,” she said. “I don’t think you get transparency through publishing judgments on Bailii. To get transparency you have to present it in a way people can understand and make sense of quickly. Bailii does not really help the system become more transparent at all.”
In a consultation document issued to lawyers in 2014, called Transparency: the next steps, Munby acknowledged the profession’s “nervousness” about further moves to increase transparency. But he said there was a need for greater openness to improve public understanding of the court process and confidence in the court system. “The public has a legitimate interest in being able to read what is being done by the judges in its name,” he told lawyers.
He is likely to announce progress in the new year on the two key reforms in the consultation document: a pilot of family hearings being held in public, and the release of documents to the media. The latter will include case summaries, skeleton arguments of the case, documents which are issued during fact-finding hearings – for example where allegations of domestic violence have been made – and experts’ reports, to allow the media to perform their watchdog role in society, he said.
Munby has already canvassed initial views on the public hearings and if he gives the go-ahead for the trial, it will go out to further consultation with the profession.
But responses to his consultation were almost universally hostile. The proposals were rejected by the Association of Lawyers for Children, which has 1,400 members, the Family Law Bar Association, Resolution, the national family lawyers’ association, and Family Justice Young People’s Board, a group of young people who have had direct experience of the family justice system.
Cris McCurley, a family lawyer who specialises in representing black and minority ethnic women in cases involving extreme domestic violence, said holding hearings in open court could stop vulnerable women taking part in hearings. “Family courts hear intimate personal details and even with anonymity imposed I think the particulars of cases would be identifiable certainly within their communities,” she said. “My worry is it would stop women coming forward to seek help to protect their children.”
Lucy Reed, a family law barrister, who runs the Transparency Project, which aims to increase understanding of the system, said opening up the courts further should be an issue for parliament to discuss.
A spokesman for the judicial communications office said Munby intended to issue further guidance on the issues raised in his August 2014 consultation on transparency in the new year.
One day in early August, 36-year-old Gavin bumped into an old friend outside That’s Entertainment music and DVD shop in Preston market.
“He pulled me to one side, but I didn’t recognise him,” Gavin (a pseudonym) says when we meet a week later. “He was like, ‘How you doing? I’m just going to get some stuff, make some money.’ He’s opened his bag and it’s full of razor blades. He’s selling razor blades for a tenner a pop, all of that business.”
Gavin says that he and the man were former “grafting partners”: commercial burglars and thieves, working around Lancashire. But in the six years since they had last seen one another, their lives had taken divergent paths.
“He’s ended up on the gear, shoplifting,” Gavin says. “I was like, ‘See you later mate.’ I felt guilty, tight, leaving him, but I thought: ‘What would happen if I’m with him and he gets pulled over and I’m in the hospital?’ I’d be in a lot of trouble, wouldn’t I? I gave him a couple of quid to buy himself a couple of pies, a cup of tea, and he wandered off … I sat there and thought: ‘If I’d not been in here, it’d be me doing that.’”
Gavin relates the story inside a meeting room at Guild Lodge hospital, in the Lancashire village of Whittingham, where he has lived for the past three years. Guild Lodge is one of 60 medium-secure mental health hospitals in England and Wales that house people deemed to be a danger either to themselves or others on account of their mental illness. Most of the 149 patients have committed offences while mentally ill, or have been diagnosed with a mental illness while already in prison. Some have been in higher-security institutions; almost all are being held under the terms of the Mental Health Act.
Gavin, who has schizophrenia, describes a life of substance abuse and crime, sometimes with violence, that took him in and out of prison and secure care settings for the past 18 years – his entire adult life. He was most recently admitted to a medium-secure ward at Guild Lodge in 2013, and is now in low-secure, from which he is permitted release to go into town, as he waits first for a tribunal hearing that could clear him for discharge and then, crucially, for a bed in supported accommodation.
“It might not work if I was just kicked out like I was in the prison system. I would have nowhere to go,” Gavin says. “I’d be on the street, in a hostel, back in crime or something. When I’ve been released from prison, it’s been a few weeks at the most. I’ve been straight back in for something else.”
From 1873 until 1995, the leafy park that surrounds Guild Lodge’s complex of modern buildings concealed Whittingham Hospital, which was Britain’s largest psychiatric institution and a centrepiece of the notorious Victorian asylum system. But Guild Lodge, which opened in 1999, is a striking representation of the advancements in secure-care provision across the UK – particularly at a security level one step below Broadmoor, Ashworth and Rampton, England’s three high-secure forensic psychiatric services.
From the outside, the pale bricks and long windows of the medium-secure area of Guild Lodge could pass for a leisure centre. Even the high mesh fence that surrounds it could be for tennis courts or a five-a-side football pitch. The low-secure area that sprawls outside looks and feels like a business park. There is little to distinguish buildings containing administration offices and meeting rooms from the wards in which patients sleep.
Service users (the preferred term for patient) considered low-risk are free to wander through the adjacent woodland, around an Anglican church, a cemetery and even a cricket pitch. One service user, who told me he spends much of his days watching wildlife and listening to music on a wind-up radio, insisted that a relative of local hero Andrew Flintoff was the groundsman.
As with all hospitals, the aim is that patients will one day be discharged from Guild Lodge with their illnesses under control. It is recovery-focused rather than punitive, and although the Ministry of Justice retains a controlling interest in the onward progression of many patients (some will go back to prison), funding for medium-secure hospitals comes entirely from NHS England’s special commissioning budget.
The unique challenge is to balance care with custody; to maintain the public’s security while effectively treating patients’ illnesses. For thousands of people like Gavin, who is genial, articulate and rational when his schizophrenia is under control, secure care units can prove the difference between what might be considered a worthwhile life, and one wasted as hostage to an unpredictable and often dangerous illness.
Such endeavours are not cheap. According to figures from NHS England, expenditure on medium- and high-secure mental health services during the past year was £1.23bn, which accounts for 74% of the special commissioning budget and is one fifth of all public spending on adult mental health care. Accurate figures on a patient-by-patient basis are difficult to obtain, but conservative estimates put the cost of a bed and care for a year in a medium-secure hospital at £150,000, nearly five times as much as a male inmate in a category B prison.
Partly because of their cost, forensic psychiatry hospitals are under almost constant review. Medium-secure services in particular have remained a focal point for mental health campaigners, who say patients are often too readily admitted to an unnecessarily high level of security and then stay too long. The most recent government taskforce report on mental health – titled Five Year Forward View for Mental Health, released in February – made fresh commitments to “prevent avoidable admissions”, support recovery in the “least restrictive setting” and “address existing fragmented pathways in secure care”. In essence, it emphasises a need to get patients hastily into secure care when mental illness is the root cause of their offending, but also to discharge them quickly and safely, with adequate continued care, to get on with their lives.
Yet there remain frequent claims that the Ministry of Justice is overly cautious in approving discharge from secure hospitals, and that there is inadequate onward housing provision for patients reintegrating into communities. In general, treatment for mental illness has progressed significantly since the days of the asylums, but age-old misconceptions persist about psychiatric institutions. Patients still suffer familiar prejudice on account of their illness, compounded by their detention in hospital.
“It’s very, very risk-averse stuff,” says Jenny Shaw, the recently retired clinical director for specialist services at Lancashire Care Foundation Trust, which oversees Guild Lodge. “Even having conversations with some of my friends, who should know better, [I hear] ‘How can you ever let people who have committed those kinds of offences out?’ It’s a complete lack of understanding of what we’re trying to do. I think there’s still a massive stigma around mental health, and people with mental health problems and who are offenders – it’s a massive double whammy.”
I visited Guild Lodge twice earlier this year, touring the medium-secure unit and talking to some service users about treatment programmes and the challenges they face. Journalists are rarely permitted inside secure care environments: service users are often vulnerable and their recovery programmes easily undermined by external distractions. Administrators are also wary of the sensationalist reporting mental health hospitals have been known to attract, while victims and their families stand to gain little by repeated exposure to the perpetrators of the crimes against them. All names have therefore been changed and details of offences omitted.
In general, people who have committed offences as a result of a mental illness tend to be blighted by extreme guilt for their actions. Many people hear voices or suffer delusions that have encouraged their offences. Hospitals house people suffering from a vast range of illnesses – schizophrenia, psychosis, acute depression, bipolar disorder – from hugely varying backgrounds, many of whom have suffered extreme trauma. The propensity to self-harm is also high.
The area “over the fence” – as one service user described the medium-secure part of the hospital – has the atmosphere of a vocational college, albeit one in which most doors are permanently locked. Staff and visitors pass through an air-lock security door, past a small office where patients can meet guests, and then into a courtyard, with various separate buildings situated either side of an access road and areas of green lawns. After appropriate risk assessment, service users are allowed access to an art room and wood and metal-working workshops, or to learn gardening skills in an on-site greenhouse and nursery. There is also a music room, and a service-user band regularly plays gigs both in and outside the hospital.